Linux commands

Basic File/Directory commands:

pwd - Print Working Directory
touch - Create a file
mkdir - create a folder
ls - list files and folders within the directory
rm - remove a file
rmdir - remove a directory
rm -rf - remove all contents recursively
ls -lart - List all files and directories in reverse order based on time
cd - change directory
clear - clear the console
history - Show the last ran 500 commands
grep - Search & find the values
mv - move files 
cp copy files
echo - print command
cat - View the file content
whoami - Show Current logged in user
head - get beginning values
tail - get end values
sort - Sort the file contents
sleep - Used to pause the terminal for a period of time
uniq - Used to filter the matching lines from a file
tr - Used to translate or delete characters from a file
sed - Stream Editor or in place editor for files.
sed -i -e 's+good+come+g' - Edit the contents directly on the file
sed 's+good+come+g' - Edit the contents to show only in the console

Groups & Permissions Commands:
chmod - Used to change the permissions of a file/dir
chown -Used to change the ownership of a file/dir
vi - visual editor for files

 vi filename - Open the file in edit mode
 i - Insert contents
 esc --> :wq! - Save & exit
 esc --> :q!  - Exit without saving.
 esc --> :set number - Assign row number
 esc --> :set nonumber -Remove assigned row number
 esc --> :1,$d - Delete rows in a file

sudo group add groupname - Used to create groups
getent group - To get all groups (cat /etc/group)
sudo groupdel groupname -Used to delete a group
sudo usermod -aG groupname username - Used to add a user in a group
getent passwd - To get all users
sudo useradd username - Used to create an user
sudeo userdel username - Used to delete an user
id username - Used to get information about a particular user
sudo - Enables the user to run commands with elevated privileges. In simple as a root user


Date & Calendar commands:
cal - To Show Calendar
date - To show current date

Tar Commands:
tar -cvzf outputfilename.tar.gz sourcefolder - Used to create tar (kinda zipped files, tar - Tape archive)
tar -xzf outputfilename.tar.gz targetfolder - Used to untar the tarred files

Machine Utilization commands:
df - Show Disk Utilization
free - Show RAM free space
top /htop - CPU Utilization
ps aux - Get all the running processes

Login Commands:
ssh - Used to login into a remote server securely
scp - Used to copy files b/w two systems securely via ssh


Network Commands:
ping - Used to test the connectivity between two machines
curl - Used for transferring data between servers, clients.
telnet - Allows us to establish a connection to a remote computer and also used to check port status
nslookup - Used to query DNS to obtain IP address or domain name
dig - Used to query DNS to obtain IP address or domain name in Modern systems.
netstat - Show the information about the network connections and statistics.
traceroute - Used to trace the route taken by packets across an IP network

Git Commands:
git clone repository url - Used to clone the remote repository to the local PC.
git add . - Add all the changes to the Staging area
git status - Check the status of the Staging area
git commit - Used to save all to a local repository along with commit message
git branch - List all branches
git branch branchname - create a new branch
git branch -b branchname - create a new branch and switch to it
git checkout branchname - Switch to a branch
git branch -d branchname - Delete a branch
git branch -m oldname newname - Rename a branch
git init - Used to create a empty git repo in local
git push origin branchname - Used to puch the local changes to a remote repository.
git pull origin branchname - Used to fetch and merge changes from remote repo to local repo.
git restore --staged filename - Used to unstage changes
git restore filename - Used to discard the changes made to a file
git revert commitID - Used to revert back the commit made on the local repo.
